Long ago, as I’ve heard tell, there dwelt at the temple of Morinji, in
the Province of Kotsuke, a holy priest.
Now there were three things about this reverend man. First, he was
wrapped up in meditations and observances and forms and doctrines. He
was a great one for the Sacred Sutras, and knew strange and mystical
things. Then he had a fine exquisite taste of his own, and nothing
pleased him so much as the ancient tea ceremony of the _Cha-no-yu_; and
for the third thing about him, he knew both sides of a copper coin well
enough and loved a bargain.
None so pleased as he when he happened upon an ancient tea-kettle, lying
rusty and dirty and half-forgotten in a corner of a poor shop in a back
street of his town.
“An ugly bit of old metal,” says the holy man to the shopkeeper; “but it
will do well enough to boil my humble drop of water of an evening. I’ll
give you three _rin_ for it.” This he did and took the kettle home,
rejoicing; for it was of bronze, fine work, the very thing for the
_Cha-no-yu_.
A novice cleaned and scoured the tea-kettle, and it came out as pretty
as you please. The priest turned it this way and that, and upside down,
looked into it, tapped it with his finger-nail. He smiled. “A bargain,”
he cried, “a bargain!” and rubbed his hands. He set the kettle upon a
box covered over with a purple cloth, and looked at it so long that
first he was fain to rub his eyes many times, and then to close them
altogether. His head dropped forward and he slept.
And then, believe me, the wonderful thing happened. The tea-kettle
moved, though no hand was near it. A hairy head, with two bright eyes,
looked out of the spout. The lid jumped up and down. Four brown and
hairy paws appeared, and a fine bushy tail. In a minute the kettle was
down from the box and going round and round looking at things.
“A very comfortable room, to be sure,” says the tea-kettle.
Pleased enough to find itself so well lodged, it soon began to dance and
to caper nimbly and to sing at the top of its voice. Three or four
novices were studying in the next room. “The old man is lively,” they
said; “only hark to him. What can he be at?” And they laughed in their
sleeves.
Heaven’s mercy, the noise that the tea-kettle made! Bang! bang! Thud!
thud! thud!
The novices soon stopped laughing. One of them slid aside the
_kara-kami_ and peeped through.
“Arah, the devil and all’s in it!” he cried. “Here’s the master’s old
tea-kettle turned into a sort of a badger. The gods protect us from
witchcraft, or for certain we shall be lost!”
“And I scoured it not an hour since,” said another novice, and he fell
to reciting the Holy Sutras on his knees.
A third laughed. “I’m for a nearer view of the hobgoblin,” he said.
So the lot of them left their books in a twinkling, and gave chase to
the tea-kettle to catch it. But could they come up with the tea-kettle?
Not a bit of it. It danced and it leapt and it flew up into the air. The
novices rushed here and there, slipping upon the mats. They grew hot.
They grew breathless.
“Ha, ha! Ha, ha!” laughed the tea-kettle; and “Catch me if you can!”
laughed the wonderful tea-kettle.
Presently the priest awoke, all rosy, the holy man.
“And what’s the meaning of this racket,” he says, “disturbing me at my
holy meditations and all?”
“Master, master,” cry the novices, panting and mopping their brows,
“your tea-kettle is bewitched. It was a badger, no less. And the dance
it has been giving us, you’d never believe!”
“Stuff and nonsense,” says the priest; “bewitched? Not a bit of it.
There it rests on its box, good quiet thing, just where I put it.”
Sure enough, so it did, looking as hard and cold and innocent as you
please. There was not a hair of a badger near it. It was the novices
that looked foolish.
“A likely story indeed,” says the priest. “I have heard of the pestle
that took wings to itself and flew away, parting company with the
mortar. That is easily to be understood by any man. But a kettle that
turned into a badger--no, no! To your books, my sons, and pray to be
preserved from the perils of illusion.”
That very night the holy man filled the kettle with water from the
spring and set it on the _hibachi_ to boil for his cup of tea. When the
water began to boil--
“Ai! Ai!” the kettle cried; “Ai! Ai! The heat of the Great Hell!” And it
lost no time at all, but hopped off the fire as quick as you please.
“Sorcery!” cried the priest. “Black magic! A devil! A devil! A devil!
Mercy on me! Help! Help! Help!” He was frightened out of his wits, the
dear good man. All the novices came running to see what was the matter.
“The tea-kettle is bewitched,” he gasped; “it was a badger, assuredly it
was a badger ... it both speaks and leaps about the room.”
“Nay, master,” said a novice, “see where it rests upon its box, good
quiet thing.”
And sure enough, so it did.
“Most reverend sir,” said the novice, “let us all pray to be preserved
from the perils of illusion.”
The priest sold the tea-kettle to a tinker and got for it twenty copper
coins.
“It’s a mighty fine bit of bronze,” says the priest. “Mind, I’m giving
it away to you, I’m sure I cannot tell what for.” Ah, he was the one for
a bargain! The tinker was a happy man and carried home the kettle. He
turned it this way and that, and upside down, and looked into it.
“A pretty piece,” says the tinker; “a very good bargain.” And when he
went to bed that night he put the kettle by him, to see it first thing
in the morning.
He awoke at midnight and fell to looking at the kettle by the bright
light of the moon.
Presently it moved, though there was no hand near it.
“Strange,” said the tinker; but he was a man who took things as they
came.
A hairy head, with two bright eyes, looked out of the kettle’s spout.
The lid jumped up and down. Four brown and hairy paws appeared, and a
fine bushy tail. It came quite close to the tinker and laid a paw upon
him.
“Well?” says the tinker.
“I am not wicked,” says the tea-kettle.
“No,” says the tinker.
“But I like to be well treated. I am a badger tea-kettle.”
“So it seems,” says the tinker.
“At the temple they called me names, and beat me and set me on the fire.
I couldn’t stand it, you know.”
“I like your spirit,” says the tinker.
“I think I shall settle down with you.”
“Shall I keep you in a lacquer box?” says the tinker.
“Not a bit of it, keep me with you; let us have a talk now and again. I
am very fond of a pipe. I like rice to eat, and beans and sweet things.”
“A cup of _saké_ sometimes?” says the tinker.
“Well, yes, now you mention it.”
“I’m willing,” says the tinker.
“Thank you kindly,” says the tea-kettle; “and, as a beginning, would you
object to my sharing your bed? The night has turned a little chilly.”
“Not the least in the world,” says the tinker.
The tinker and the tea-kettle became the best of friends. They ate and
talked together. The kettle knew a thing or two and was very good
company.
One day: “Are you poor?” says the kettle.
“Yes,” says the tinker, “middling poor.”
“Well, I have a happy thought. For a tea-kettle, I am
out-of-the-way--really very accomplished.”
“I believe you,” says the tinker.
“My name is _Bumbuku-Chagama_; I am the very prince of Badger
Tea-Kettles.”
“Your servant, my lord,” says the tinker.
“If you’ll take my advice,” says the tea-kettle, “you’ll carry me round
as a show; I really am out-of-the-way, and it’s my opinion you’d make a
mint of money.”
“That would be hard work for you, my dear _Bumbuku_,” says the tinker.
“Not at all; let us start forthwith,” says the tea-kettle.
So they did. The tinker bought hangings for a theatre, and he called the
show _Bumbuku-Chagama_. How the people flocked to see the fun! For the
wonderful and most accomplished tea-kettle danced and sang, and walked
the tight rope as to the manner born. It played such tricks and had such
droll ways that the people laughed till their sides ached. It was a
treat to see the tea-kettle bow as gracefully as a lord and thank the
people for their patience.
The _Bumbuku-Chagama_ was the talk of the country-side, and all the
gentry came to see it as well as the commonalty. As for the tinker, he
waved a fan and took the money. You may believe that he grew fat and
rich. He even went to Court, where the great ladies and the royal
princesses made much of the wonderful tea-kettle.
At last the tinker retired from business, and to him the tea-kettle came
with tears in its bright eyes.
“I’m much afraid it’s time to leave you,” it says.
“Now, don’t say that, _Bumbuku_, dear,” says the tinker. “We’ll be so
happy together now we are rich.”
“I’ve come to the end of my time,” says the tea-kettle. “You’ll not see
old _Bumbuku_ any more; henceforth I shall be an ordinary kettle,
nothing more or less.”
“Oh, my dear _Bumbuku_, what shall I do?” cried the poor tinker in
tears.
“I think I should like to be given to the temple of Morinji, as a very
sacred treasure,” says the tea-kettle.
It never spoke or moved again. So the tinker presented it as a very
sacred treasure to the temple, and the half of his wealth with it.
And the tea-kettle was held in wondrous fame for many a long year. Some
persons even worshipped it as a saint.
IV
THE PEONY LANTERN
[Illustration: The Peony Lantern.--_P. 25._]
In Yedo there dwelt a _samurai_ called Hagiwara. He was a _samurai_ of
the _hatamoto_, which is of all the ranks of _samurai_ the most
honourable. He possessed a noble figure and a very beautiful face, and
was beloved of many a lady of Yedo, both openly and in secret. For
himself, being yet very young, his thoughts turned to pleasure rather
than to love, and morning, noon and night he was wont to disport himself
with the gay youth of the city. He was the prince and leader of joyous
revels within doors and without, and would often parade the streets for
long together with bands of his boon companions.
One bright and wintry day during the Festival of the New Year he found
himself with a company of laughing youths and maidens playing at
battledore and shuttlecock. He had wandered far away from his own
quarter of the city, and was now in a suburb quite the other side of
Yedo, where the streets were empty, more or less, and the quiet houses
stood in gardens. Hagiwara wielded his heavy battledore with great skill
and grace, catching the gilded shuttlecock and tossing it lightly into
the air; but at length with a careless or an ill-judged stroke, he sent
it flying over the heads of the players, and over the bamboo fence of a
garden near by. Immediately he started after it. Then his companions
cried, “Stay, Hagiwara; here we have more than a dozen shuttlecocks.”
“Nay,” he said, “but this was dove-coloured and gilded.”
“Foolish one!” answered his friends; “here we have six shuttlecocks all
dove-coloured and gilded.”
But he paid them no heed, for he had become full of a very strange
desire for the shuttlecock he had lost. He scaled the bamboo fence and
dropped into the garden which was upon the farther side. Now he had
marked the very spot where the shuttlecock should have fallen, but it
was not there; so he searched along the foot of the bamboo fence--but
no, he could not find it. Up and down he went, beating the bushes with
his battledore, his eyes on the ground, drawing breath heavily as if he
had lost his dearest treasure. His friends called him, but he did not
come, and they grew tired and went to their own homes. The light of day
began to fail. Hagiwara, the _samurai_, looked up and saw a girl
standing a few yards away from him. She beckoned him with her right
hand, and in her left she held a gilded shuttlecock with dove-coloured
feathers.
The _samurai_ shouted joyfully and ran forward. Then the girl drew away
from him, still beckoning him with the right hand. The shuttlecock
lured him, and he followed. So they went, the two of them, till they
came to the house that was in the garden, and three stone steps that led
up to it. Beside the lowest step there grew a plum tree in blossom, and
upon the highest step there stood a fair and very young lady. She was
most splendidly attired in robes of high festival. Her _kimono_ was of
water-blue silk, with sleeves of ceremony so long that they touched the
ground; her under-dress was scarlet, and her great girdle of brocade was
stiff and heavy with gold. In her hair were pins of gold and
tortoiseshell and coral.
When Hagiwara saw the lady, he knelt down forthwith and made her due
obeisance, till his forehead touched the ground.
Then the lady spoke, smiling with pleasure like a child. “Come into my
house, Hagiwara Sama, _samurai_ of the _hatamoto_. I am O’Tsuyu, the
Lady of the Morning Dew. My dear handmaiden, O’Yoné, has brought you to
me. Come in, Hagiwara Sama, _samurai_ of the _hatamoto_; for indeed I am
glad to see you, and happy is this hour.”
So the _samurai_ went in, and they brought him to a room of ten mats,
where they entertained him; for the Lady of the Morning Dew danced
before him in the ancient manner, whilst O’Yoné, the handmaiden, beat
upon a small scarlet-tasselled drum.
Afterwards they set food before him, the red rice of the festival and
sweet warm wine, and he ate and drank of the food they gave him.
It was dark night when Hagiwara took his leave. “Come again, honourable
lord, come again,” said O’Yoné the handmaiden.
“Yea, lord, you needs must come,” whispered the Lady of the Morning Dew.
The _samurai_ laughed. “And if I do not come?” he said mockingly. “What
if I do not come?”
The lady stiffened, and her child’s face grew grey, but she laid her
hand upon Hagiwara’s shoulder.
“Then,” she said, “it will be death, lord. Death it will be for you and
for me. There is no other way.” O’Yoné shuddered and hid her eyes with
her sleeve.
The _samurai_ went out into the night, being very much afraid.
Long, long he sought for his home and could not find it, wandering in
the black darkness from end to end of the sleeping city. When at last he
reached his familiar door the late dawn was almost come, and wearily he
threw himself upon his bed. Then he laughed. “After all, I have left
behind me my shuttlecock,” said Hagiwara the _samurai_.
The next day Hagiwara sat alone in his house from morning till evening.
He had his hands before him; and he thought, but did nothing more. At
the end of the time he said, “It is a joke that a couple of _geisha_
have sought to play on me. Excellent, in faith, but they shall not have
me!” So he dressed himself in his best and went forth to join his
friends. For five or six days he was at joustings and junketings, the
gayest of the gay. His wit was ready, his spirits were wild.
Then he said, “By the gods, I am deathly sick of this,” and took to
walking the streets of Yedo alone. From end to end of the great city he
went. He wandered by day and he wandered by night, by street and alley
he went, by hill and moat and castle wall, but he found not what he
sought. He could not come upon the garden where his shuttlecock was
lost, nor yet upon the Lady of the Morning Dew. His spirit had no rest.
He fell sick and took to his bed, where he neither ate nor slept, but
grew spectre-thin. This was about the third month. In the sixth month,
at the time of _niubai_, the hot and rainy season, he rose up, and, in
spite of all his faithful servant could say or do to dissuade him, he
wrapped a loose summer robe about him and at once went forth.
“Alack! Alack!” cried the servant, “the youth has the fever, or he is
perchance mad.”
Hagiwara faltered not at all. He looked neither to the right nor to the
left. Straight forward he went, for he said to himself, “All roads lead
past my love’s house.” Soon he came to a quiet suburb, and to a certain
house whose garden had a split bamboo fence. Hagiwara laughed softly and
scaled the fence.
“The same, the very same shall be the manner of our meeting,” he said.
He found the garden wild and overgrown. Moss covered the three stone
steps. The plum tree that grew there fluttered its green leaves
disconsolate. The house was still, its shutters were all closed, it was
forlorn and deserted.
The _samurai_ grew cold as he stood and wondered. A soaking rain fell.
There came an old man into the garden. He said to Hagiwara:
“Sir, what do you do here?”
“The white flower has fallen from the plum tree,” said the _samurai_.
“Where is the Lady of the Morning Dew?”
“She is dead,” answered the old man; “dead these five or six moons, of a
strange and sudden sickness. She lies in the graveyard on the hill, and
O’Yoné, her handmaid, lies by her side. She could not suffer her
mistress to wander alone through the long night of Yomi. For their sweet
spirits’ sake I would still tend this garden, but I am old and it is
little that I can do. Oh, sir, they are dead indeed. The grass grows on
their graves.”
Hagiwara went to his own home. He took a slip of pure white wood and he
wrote upon it, in large fair characters, the dear name of his lady. This
he set up, and burned before it incense and sweet odours, and made every
offering that was meet, and did due observance, and all for the welfare
of her departed spirit.
Then drew near the Festival of _Bon_, the time of returning souls. The
good folk of Yedo took lanterns and visited their graves. Bringing food
and flowers, they cared for their beloved dead. On the thirteenth day
of the seventh month, which, in the _Bon_, is the day of days, Hagiwara
the _samurai_ walked in his garden by night for the sake of the
coolness. It was windless and dark. A cicala hidden in the heart of a
pomegranate flower sang shrilly now and again. Now and again a carp
leaped in the round pond. For the rest it was still, and never a leaf
stirred.
About the hour of the Ox, Hagiwara heard the sound of footsteps in the
lane that lay beyond his garden hedge. Nearer and nearer they came.
“Women’s _geta_,” said the _samurai_. He knew them by the hollow echoing
noise. Looking over his rose hedge, he saw two slender women come out of
the dimness hand in hand. One of them carried a lantern with a bunch of
peony flowers tied to the handle. It was such a lantern as is used at
the time of the _Bon_ in the service of the dead. It swung as the two
women walked, casting an uncertain light. As they came abreast of the
_samurai_ upon the other side of the hedge, they turned their faces to
him. He knew them at once, and gave one great cry.
The girl with the peony lantern held it up so that the light fell upon
him.
“Hagiwara Sama,” she cried, “by all that is most wonderful! Why, lord,
we were told that you were dead. We have daily recited the _Nembutsu_
for your soul these many moons!”
“Come in, come in, O’Yoné,” he said; “and is it indeed your mistress
that you hold by the hand? Can it be my lady?... Oh, my love!”
O’Yoné answered, “Who else should it be?” and the two came in at the
garden gate.
But the Lady of the Morning Dew held up her sleeve to hide her face.
“How was it I lost you?” said the _samurai_; “how was it I lost you,
O’Yoné?”
“Lord,” she said, “we have moved to a little house, a very little house,
in the quarter of the city which is called the Green Hill. We were
suffered to take nothing with us there, and we are grown very poor. With
grief and want my mistress is become pale.”
Then Hagiwara took his lady’s sleeve to draw it gently from her face.
“Lord,” she sobbed, “you will not love me, I am not fair.”
But when he looked upon her his love flamed up within him like a
consuming fire, and shook him from head to foot. He said never a word.
She drooped. “Lord,” she murmured, “shall I go or stay?”
And he said, “Stay.”
A little before daybreak the _samurai_ fell into a deep sleep, and awoke
to find himself alone in the clear light of the morning. He lost not an
instant, but rose and went forth, and immediately made his way through
Yedo to the quarter of the city which is called the Green Hill. Here he
inquired for the house of the Lady of the Morning Dew, but no one could
direct him. High and low he searched fruitlessly. It seemed to him that
for the second time he had lost his dear lady, and he turned homewards
in bitter despair. His way led him through the grounds of a certain
temple, and as he went he marked two graves that were side by side. One
was little and obscure, but the other was marked by a fair monument,
like the tomb of some great one. Before the monument there hung a
lantern with a bunch of peony flowers tied to its handle. It was such a
lantern as is used at the time of _Bon_ in the service of the dead.
Long, long did the _samurai_ stand as one in a dream. Then he smiled a
little and said:
“‘_We have moved to a little house ... a very little house ... upon the
Green Hill ... we were suffered to take nothing with us there and we are
grown very poor ... with grief and want my mistress is become pale...._’
A little house, a dark house, yet you will make room for me, oh, my
beloved, pale one of my desires. We have loved for the space of ten
existences, leave me not now ... my dear.” Then he went home.
His faithful servant met him and cried:
“Now what ails you, master?”
He said, “Why, nothing at all.... I was never merrier.”
But the servant departed weeping, and saying, “The mark of death is on
his face ... and I, whither shall I go that bore him as a child in these
arms?”
Every night, for seven nights, the maidens with the peony lantern came
to Hagiwara’s dwelling. Fair weather or foul was the same to them. They
came at the hour of the Ox. There was mystic wooing. By the strong bond
of illusion the living and the dead were bound together.
On the seventh night the servant of the _samurai_, wakeful with fear and
sorrow, made bold to peer into his lord’s room through a crack in the
wooden shutters. His hair stood on end and his blood ran cold to see
Hagiwara in the arms of a fearful thing, smiling up at the horror that
was its face, stroking its dank green robe with languid fingers. With
daylight the servant made his way to a holy man of his acquaintance.
When he had told his tale he asked, “Is there any hope for Hagiwara
Sama?”
“Alack,” said the holy man, “who can withstand the power of Karma?
Nevertheless, there is a little hope.” So he told the servant what he
must do. Before nightfall, this one had set a sacred text above every
door and window-place of his master’s house, and he had rolled in the
silk of his master’s girdle a golden emblem of the Tathagata. When these
things were done, Hagiwara being drawn two ways became himself as weak
as water. And his servant took him in his arms, laid him upon his bed
and covered him lightly, and saw him fall into a deep sleep.
At the hour of the Ox there was heard the sound of footsteps in the
lane, without the garden hedge. Nearer and nearer they came. They grew
slow and stopped.
“What means this, O’Yoné, O’Yoné?” said a piteous voice. “The house is
asleep, and I do not see my lord.”
“Come home, sweet lady, Hagiwara’s heart is changed.”
“That I will not, O’Yoné, O’Yoné ... you must find a way to bring me to
my lord.”
“Lady, we cannot enter here. See the Holy Writing over every door and
window-place ... we may not enter here.”
There was a sound of bitter weeping and a long wail.
“Lord, I have loved thee through the space of ten existences.” Then the
footsteps retreated and their echo died away.
The next night it was quite the same. Hagiwara slept in his weakness;
his servant watched; the wraiths came and departed in sobbing despair.
The third day, when Hagiwara went to the bath, a thief stole the emblem,
the golden emblem of the Tathagata, from his girdle. Hagiwara did not
mark it. But that night he lay awake. It was his servant that slept,
worn out with watching. Presently a great rain fell and Hagiwara,
waking, heard the sound of it upon the roof. The heavens were opened and
for hours the rain fell. And it tore the holy text from over the round
window in Hagiwara’s chamber.
At the hour of the Ox there was heard the sound of footsteps in the lane
without the garden hedge. Nearer and nearer they came. They grew slow
and stopped.
“This is the last time, O’Yoné, O’Yoné, therefore bring me to my lord.
Think of the love of ten existences. Great is the power of Karma. There
must be a way....”
“Come, my beloved,” called Hagiwara with a great voice.
“Open, lord ... open and I come.”
But Hagiwara could not move from his couch.
“Come, my beloved,” he called for the second time.
“I cannot come, though the separation wounds me like a sharp sword. Thus
we suffer for the sins of a former life.” So the lady spoke and moaned
like the lost soul that she was. But O’Yoné took her hand.
“See the round window,” she said.
Hand in hand the two rose lightly from the earth. Like vapour they
passed through the unguarded window. The _samurai_ called, “Come to me,
beloved,” for the third time.
He was answered, “Lord, I come.”
In the grey morning Hagiwara’s servant found his master cold and dead.
At his feet stood the peony lantern burning with a weird yellow flame.
The servant shivered, took up the lantern and blew out the light; for “I
cannot bear it,” he said.
